JAKE ARCHIBALD: You think
you just die overnight,
and you wake up in the morning?
SURMA: Isn't that what sleep is?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
Let's say yes.
Let's say that's what it is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So.
SURMA: So.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Offline first--
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
--is a good thing.
It's something--
SURMA: Is it, though?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Is it, though?
Yes is the answer.
SURMA: I tend to
agree, actually.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
And we talk about
offline first as being
distinct from online first.
Right?
Offline first means it's just--
do you try getting
offline content first,
or do you try and get it later?
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: That's the rule.
So if you were to build
something online first,
the idea is, you go to
the network, and then--
SURMA: That's just how
everybody builds websites
most of the time traditionally.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
Well, a lot are
built online only.
SURMA: Ah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So the online
first would be if that fails,
then show some content.
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
But offline first
is best, because it
works in more situations.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So if
you're doing online first,
it works great when
you're offline.
SURMA: As the name
kind of implies.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah, exactly.
It fails quickly, and then it
goes for the cached content.
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But there's
another situation that
is different, and
it is this, which
I have been desperately trying
to make an industry term.
SURMA: You've been coining
this one, right, over and over.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Over and over.
I want my Ajax.
Where's my-- I want to be
famous like the guy who invented
Ajax--
SURMA: Who obviously--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --who
I don't know his name.
My plan is ruined.
There's a real problem here.
Remy invented--
SURMA: Polyfill.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --polyfill.
Right, see?
SURMA: I'm jealous of that one.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Famous.
SURMA: That's a good one.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
That is a good one.
SURMA: That's a good one.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So this is
a situation where your phone
thinks it has a connection,
but it doesn't--
SURMA: Which you
have all the time--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --which
is all the time.
SURMA: --especially when you're
on vacation or in airports,
in my experience.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: When you
need it most essentially.
And the phone doesn't
think it's offline,
so it sits there trying to
make a connection for ages,
and it never gets there.
And that is a problem.
SURMA: Especially
when you know the app
has the content offline, but it
shows a spinner for 30 seconds,
like, "I think I'm online,
so I'm rather going to try--"
JAKE ARCHIBALD: That's--
SURMA: Online first.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
That's online first.
SURMA: And that's stupid.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
So offline first,
we agree is better.
It works in more
situations, but that
means you are serving content
from your caches first.
Then you go and go, "Is
there anything new?"
And sometimes--
SURMA: There might
be something new.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: There
might be something new,
and then what do you do?
SURMA: Well, I
mean, I think we all
have seen the infamous
snack bar, right?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: This is
the solution in Squoosh.
The page loads.
It goes off.
It finds an update.
I mean, meanwhile, you could
be using the app or whatever,
and a little thing pops up at
the bottom there and says--
SURMA: Do we cancel?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's
a pinch-zooming app.
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: I forgot.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Forgot about that.
And, yeah, it's saying
here, "Update available."
SURMA: And now do you
want to reload and lose
what you've already
working on, or do
you want to ignore the
fancy new features?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But there
could be something really good.
SURMA: Yes.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So you're
like, "I'm going to reload,"
and as you say, you just
lost all your stuff now.
So that's great.
This is a very common pattern.
SURMA: Yeah.
I see it a lot.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: It seems to be the
standard pattern currently.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's
the standard pattern
especially for app
updates, where it's also
updating not just the content
but also like the underlying
JavaScript and CSS.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Because what you got
there was a full page
reload, it means the browser
can start from scratch.
SURMA: Get all the new
things from the cache.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah, it's
not trying to mix the two.
SURMA: [INAUDIBLE]
consistent update.
Yeah, because that's
the problem, right?
Especially in a world
where what we advocate for
is hash all your styles and--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yep,
yep, yep, yep, yep.
SURMA: And use HP cache as well.
Then do it-- suddenly
loading new styles
while having loaded the
old app shell, for example,
could get you in a
really iffy spot,
so the only safe way to do it
is, we like a proper reload.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And this is
what native apps do, right?
SURMA: Fair.
I mean, yeah, they have the apps
where they actually get killed
when the App Store
puts in new updates.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: The thing
that native apps can
do that the web can't do
yet is do all the update
in the background.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
So you're usually
coming to the latest version.
Not always.
Sometimes you still get
the app kill experience.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
And so we're going
to have a look at some ways
that we can improve on this.
What other ways are there?
What improvements can we make?
But I always want to
caveat that in, this
is not a solved problem.
SURMA: It's not.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And it's not--
when I say it's not
a solved problem,
it's not just the web
that hasn't caught up.
Go into airplane mode
or, better, Lie-Fi mode,
if you can find a way
to do that, and just
try a few native apps.
SURMA: Yeah.
It's super hard.
So many--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And
you get it wrong.
SURMA: Pretty much all
the apps get it wrong.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
You will see so
many empty screens.
SURMA: And it also
depends on the use case.
Some apps need-- cannot
afford to show stale data.
There's use cases where that
is actually unacceptable.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Absolutely.
So what could do better here?
If we have a think about
what some of the problems
that we actually created
here, the first one
is that we lost all the state.
SURMA: Yeah, which we could
work around, because we
had control of the button.
We could use [INAUDIBLE]
or something.
Right?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
So you want, when you
click that reload button,
to essentially put the user back
into the same state they were,
but--
SURMA: That's hard.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But with--
well, in some apps it is.
Some apps, it isn't.
SURMA: True.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It depends--
it comes down to how you
can store that state.
SURMA: Yeah.
Also, you might have shipped
a major upgrade to your app.
What if you changed
your state model,
or you even removed
or added functionality
that's just incompatible with
what the user was doing before?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
SURMA: It gets very
complicated very quickly.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So the
simplest thing you can do
is, if you've got real URLs,
you're a long way there--
SURMA: That's true.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
--because you refresh.
You're going to reload
that URL, and you're
going to send the user to a
place roughly similar to where
they were before.
SURMA: That's true.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's
not what we did here.
SURMA: It's not.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: No.
SURMA: Well, we would have
to encode the image somehow,
and it just gets iffy.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And so our
choice there is sessionStorage.
SURMA: Oh, right.
You keep talking about it,
and we've never used it yet.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: We've
never used it yet.
So this is a great tool for
remembering state like this.
So anything you put in
sessionStorage is essentially--
e-session-illy-- essentially--
SURMA: Aye.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --associated.
I've now forgotten how to speak.
That's great.
SURMA: Good thing
that's paid for.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
You can associate
data with the tab.
SURMA: Which is actually really
useful, because another thing
that we didn't even
mention, if you have a tab
and you want to store some state
so you can do the reloads--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: --what if two tabs
do that at the same time?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
SURMA: They would just
overwrite each other.
What would happen?
Because on the web, the same app
can be opened multiple times.
Another problem that
native doesn't have.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes, yes.
So if you were to use normal
local storage or IndexedDB
or something like that,
if you use it naively,
two tabs store to the same
place, blasting winds.
They refresh, and you get two
tabs going to the same place.
SURMA: Not unsolvable, but hard.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly.
Sessionstore sorts
that out for free.
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: You
can only store text.
SURMA: Bad.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So that was--
SURMA: And it's main thread,
and it's synchronous, isn't it?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
Yeah.
I mean, synchronous-- you're
only using it very quickly.
What you do, as soon as
the user says, "Yes, I
want this update"--
SURMA: In this use
case, it would be fine.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: You put the
stuff into sessionStorage.
You then reload the
page as you would.
But then the first thing your
app does when it wakes up
is go, "Did I have--"
[IMITATING MACHINE NOISES]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Exactly that.
And you have to turn
your speakers off,
because it does make
that noise every time.
And then you can use that to
put your app back into the state
that it was, JSON
decode it or whatever.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And make that
your state object, whatever,
whatever.
SURMA: Which, for an
image, would actually
be quite cumbersome yet again.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes,
because you would
hit the sessionStorage
limit very quickly.
But it's these two little
things that would really
improve what we're doing--
SURMA: Agreed.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --with Squoosh.
Another example, do
you recognize this?
SURMA: Oh, Jake, this
is one of the other apps
that you built in your lifetime
and you keep bringing up.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yep, that's it.
I spent most my career
making websites that
have checkered backgrounds--
SURMA: Approaches
the first one--
I mean, I guess in a way
it still has a checkered--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's still
very grid-based, I suppose.
I make grids.
That's what I do.
That's how I make my money.
This site, I went for basically
the same model as Squoosh,
in that it has the banner and
says, "Got an update for you
there.
Do you want it?"
But there's an
exception to the rule.
SURMA: Ooh.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: If it
finds out about that update
while it is still
on this screen,
and the user hasn't interacted
yet, it just reloads.
SURMA: Ah, because this
is how the app starts,
so it's basically a
non-visual change.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: A
non-visual change,
so as far as the user
sees, the page reloads.
And I also added this
sort of telling the user--
SURMA: Oh, look at you.
You're such a nice person.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Well, I think this--
I think I've done this
the wrong way around.
And this is something
I've been thinking
about recently, is when
that little banner comes up,
especially if it ends up in
a banner situation, and says,
"There's an update available.
Do you want it?"
I'm like, "I don't know
what's in the box."
Right.
Tell me what's in the box.
Do I want-- because
if it's like, oh,
it's a bug fix to the
feature you don't use--
SURMA: Fix it for
the odd browser.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Fix it for the
odd browser that you're not on,
which would be a problem that
would still be a service worker
update.
So it could be a fix
that you literally
will not benefit from at all.
So letting-- you know, I think
there's an opportunity that's
trying to sell
the user on, yeah,
you want to click this button.
SURMA: You want to click it.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's
going to really--
SURMA: Well, in this
case, you tell me about it
after I clicked it.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes, like I say,
I got it the wrong way around.
Chill out.
But it's actually not too
bad in this situation,
because the user didn't
have to click anything.
SURMA: True.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: I get
away with this here
because the home page
here, it's quite boring.
SURMA: There's a
lot of free space
to just show a change log.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And
also nothing moving.
SURMA: Yeah, any
animation will basically
disrupt the illusion of
a transparent reload.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Because
you would see that reload.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And because it
all goes for a service worker,
the reload is really fast.
But yes, if there was an
animation or something there,
you would see that
stop-start, which
takes us to another website.
Once again, I'm going to
purely just talk about things
that I had some involvement
on, but this is one
that you had an involvement in.
SURMA: Oh, yeah,
I'm OK with this.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
You're fine with this?
SURMA: Yeah.
It's OK.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
SURMA: I like this one a lot.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So--
SURMA: So we built a game.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: We built a game.
It's like "Minesweeper,"
essentially, and this is it.
But it came to the bit where
I did the service work a bit,
and it came to the bit to
handle updates, and I was just--
SURMA: We went through a
few iterations on this.
We had different
things we tried out.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well,
I started bringing
in the code to do the
same thing as Squoosh.
There's an update available,
and I just found myself
feeling really depressed about
the whole thing, because it's
like this is a
horrible situation.
And I knew I couldn't do
the same thing with SVGOMG,
because you would-- this
lovely background that you made
and this lovely
intro that I made--
anyway, can't do
the reload thing,
because of the animations.
Didn't want to do the banner
thing, because it's horrible.
SURMA: Right.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So I actually
went back to something that--
I've seen sites like
Flipkart do this,
and it was also something
I did with Lanyard back
in the day, which is
find an opportunity
to reload when you can.
SURMA: Yeah, because the
start page is just this.
If you can't reload here,
because they might already
be configuring, maybe
it was something
further down the line.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And so when
you press the start button,
if there is an update available,
rather than just launching
into the game, which
you usually do,
it does the
sessionStorage trick.
But it doesn't put a
lot of data in there.
All it puts in is the type of
game that's about to start.
SURMA: That's all you need,
because that's all the input
it has been given so far.
The game hasn't
been generated yet,
so we don't need to
store the entire field.
You can just say,
"This user wants
to play a game on easy mode."
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yep, and then
it reloads the page and--
SURMA: Which causes
a new game logic
if there is no game
logic to be loaded.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And it
will find that-- yeah, it
will go, "Oh, there's
something in sessionStorage.
I'm just going to start again."
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And here's
what that looks like.
So you actually
saw a reload there.
It does a bit more
loading up front,
because we're
generating the sprites,
and normally it would pull
those out of the cache.
But it's a new version, so--
SURMA: Need to build new ones.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It
builds new ones,
and it loads, and
it's not too bad.
SURMA: No.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
It's not too bad.
SURMA: Look at that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: You really--
yeah.
You did the animation work.
Well done.
But it means that you
can see it kind of gives
the game away a
little bit when you
see a URL bar, because
we'll see this start
to spin very briefly.
But it's loading from a service
worker, so it's really fast.
SURMA: It's really
fast enough, yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But it's
even less noticeable--
SURMA: Only when you know
it, you actually notice it,
I think.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
SURMA: I don't think many
players know what's happening.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well, they do
now if they're watching this.
SURMA: OK.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Don't they?
That's the whole
point of this video.
SURMA: Jake.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Do you not
realize we have some viewers?
Not many.
Some though.
SURMA: Few loyal ones.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Few loyal viewers.
SURMA: Shout out.
I really like this
pattern, by the way.
I think it's a really nice one
which probably doesn't apply
to things like a blog,
but every kind of app
could probably have a
situation where a click could
be turned into a reload
and then navigate
to wherever you wanted to go.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
Yes, and as I say, I've
seen content sites do
this, where you click a link.
It's very possible you're going
to do a navigation anyway.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But It makes
the service worker updates
at the same time.
You're right, though.
Content sites,
slightly different.
Like the Twitter model,
it's something they
will say, "There's new content.
Do you want to see it?"
It's still a click
away, but it's not
a full page reload away.
Something like a chat app.
If you scroll to the bottom,
you just add the new stuff,
and you scroll to it.
SURMA: Pretty much.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: That's easy.
I've been thinking a
little bit about what
we would do for something
that is a bit more content-y.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So this is
a blog post, essentially.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And--
SURMA: So use basically
is now your user
went to the site, started
reading the log post,
but we just published
a little typo fix
or maybe added a whole paragraph
of new, important information.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
SURMA: What do you do?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: What do you do?
And this is where--
I think, well, you started
mentioning earlier.
You could do different
things depending
on the age of the content,
the type of the content.
SURMA: And you could build
something smart or dumb.
You could do something-- oh, if
the content that I'm replacing
is not on screen, you could
go in and actually inject it.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
That is the dream.
Right?
You are prepared to
go to that much effort
to realize that the user--
SURMA: It's hard.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
--is off the screen
and just sneakily update it.
But I would say,
with a blog post,
I think a model I want to try--
I haven't actually
tried this, but I
think it's a workable pattern,
is go somewhere between online
first and offline first--
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --where you
would deliver straightaway
the shell of the page, so
the bar across the top there,
and get ready to stream
the rest of the content in.
And then if that hasn't happened
for a second and a half,
if you haven't got
any new data, then
that's your cue to
show something like,
"This is taking a while.
Do you want to look
at the cached data?"
And you could take
that option and say
how old the cache data
is, so that the user can
make an informed decision.
SURMA: I think the last thing
I built, I actually delivered
from cache, but if the
new content was completely
done downloading within 500
milliseconds of the page being
on screen, I would
just swap it out.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Just swap it.
That--
SURMA: Because I felt--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --is really
difficult to get right.
SURMA: --like the
user wouldn't have
engaged with the
page enough to have
settled into a scroll position.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: That's true.
SURMA: It's not a
perfect experience.
It would probably flicker,
because you might have
already scrolled, maybe not.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's got the
same problem as web fonts.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right?
You have the possibility
of content moving around.
Like you say, if
it's early enough,
it might not be a problem.
But if you give the user
the opportunity to decide,
that could be a model
worth going for,
and that way you're not just
waiting until the content fails
to load before you let
the user at the content
already on the device.
You give them the option.
The other way is to essentially
go back to the banner thing,
or have something
across the top saying--
SURMA: "This is outdated."
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
--"This is outdated."
This is the data that--
SURMA: Which again, then
always I wonder, "Well, what's
the change?
I want to know what
you messed up."
I don't want it to
reload, because this
is the wrong version.
What was your mistake?
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Duplicate tab, update,
and then put both side by side.
SURMA: Visual differences.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: What's
the factual difference?
Yeah, with a blog
post, it's probably
fine to let the user look
at the stale content,
but, yeah, if you're
a new site, if you're
displaying life and
death information,
that is when you were saying--
if I'm reading your blog
post that's 10 minutes old,
not a problem.
SURMA: Probably fine.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Probably not.
If you're reading one of my blog
posts that's 10 minutes old,
you are missing out on some
serious spelling corrections,
which especially if I've just
published, because I will go
through and correct that a lot.
But just spelling,
whereas if it's
a news story that's
10 minutes old,
that could be really serious.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But the web--
you get the tools
to look at that.
You can get to
make that decision.
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: If it's
just being a quick refresh--
SURMA: We definitely have
all the tools to build
all these different patterns.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
SURMA: It's just a matter
of actually building them.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So
that's basically
what I wanted to talk about.
As I said, there's no kind of--
SURMA: There's no bottom
line here really, is there?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: There's
some real examples there,
but it's something that I want
to see the web exploring more,
and I want to
explore on the web.
I feel that we've got some
good patterns for apps.
I would like to see it explored
a bit more for content.
SURMA: Agreed.
Let's do that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: I had
this big, long animation,
everything was flying around,
and I was really proud of it,
because I did it on a plane, and
when I presented it to people,
everyone was like, "Oh."
SURMA: Let's go from 11 to two.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's a bit--
hmm.
But I was really proud
of it at the time,
so I was like, my
heart was ripped out.